The 2010 TDI Summer Institute was held from June 22 to 26 at the Centro Padre Zegrí in Nigua, DR. Educators took courses in engineering and technology and Spanish. Twenty-two middle school and high school educators participated

MACILEs 2010 Teacher Development Institute (TDI) Session will take place from June 21st through 28th. This year we are offering the following diploma concentrations all taught by MACILE collaborators fro US universities.

Spanish I: Fundamentals of Composition and Critical AnalysisSpanish II: Methodology and Development of Curriculum using Primary Sources

Prof. Rosario M. de Swanson, Ph.D., Malboro College

Active Math: Methodology, Fundamentals, and Systematic Focus for Problem Solving

Prof. SClaudina Vargas, Ph.D., Director COSOLA

Science in Basic Education: Interactive Science for Inquisitive Minds

Prof. SClaudina Vargas, Ph.D., Director COSOLA

Engineering and Techn0logy: Engineering is Essential

Prof. Steve Shumway, Ph.D., BYU

Prof. Ron Terry, Ph.D., BYU

Prof. Geoff Wright, Ph.D., BYU

Each diploma track courses are held from 8:30 AM to 3:30 PM at Colegio Padre Zegri, Nigua. The day is comprised of three 2-hour class sessions with a 30-minute break from 10:30 - 11:00 AM and lunch from 12:30 - 1:30 PM.  

Thanks to generosity of our supporters, we are able to continue to offer TDI Session for free. We suggest a small contribution of RD$300 to help us cover our cost. Admisson and participation are not dependent on teachers ability to pay. 

We'd also like to thank Colegio Padre Zegri for their continued generosity and support by donating their facilities for MACILE programs. 