Note: This content needs to be redesigned. Only abstract or the title should be shown when paper have been published. Unpublished work can be made available by PDF files. Brief description of current research can be presented.


# [1] Effort to Include Technology... 

Last spring, an official from MACILE contacted the Technology and Engineering Education (TEE) Program at _______ regarding an opportunity to conduct in-service teacher training in the Dominican Republic (DR). Despite their inability to speak Spanish, two faculty members accepted this opportunity and went to the DR and spent three days training the teachers and teaching several classes of students technology and engineering content. 
From information provided by the MACILE administrator, the TEE faculty members anticipated several challenges to delivering the teacher training in-service. The first challenge stemmed from the fact that neither faculty member could speak Spanish. A translator was provided which partially helped solve this challenge. Additionally, the faculty members decided to teach a unit on electricity and electronics, hoping that the math and schematic symbols involved in the teaching could be easily understood by the teachers and students without need of additional translation. These solutions, along with the fact that many of the teachers and students had a familiarity with English enabled the TEE faculty members to provide the teacher in-service without too much difficulty. 

The second challenge was related to the lower level of content knowledge and skills of the Dominican teachers involved in the in-service. When first developing the model for in- service, the TEE faculty considered conducting a morning session with only the teachers and then observe these teachers while they presented the same information to their students during an afternoon session. Before beginning the teacher in-service, the TEE faculty had an opportunity to observe the teachers and students in a classroom setting and determined that given the teacher’s limited knowledge of science and technical content and because of the common use of rote memorization as a method of instruction, this model for teacher in-service would not be effective. While very eager and able to participate in the in-service, the teachers needed to not only learn the content, but more importantly needed to have a variety of instruction methods modeled for them to see how this content might be effectively taught. Because of this, the Dominican teachers were taught content and participated in the technology and engineering activities along with their students during the morning session, and then these teachers team taught with the TEE faculty during the afternoon session. This allowed the TEE faculty members to model for the teachers instructional strategies appropriate for teaching the specific content and then for the Dominican teachers to apply what they learned in a mentored environment. 
The final challenge was the lack of hand-on materials available in the DR classrooms needed to adequately teach technology and engineering content. To overcome this problem, the TEE faculty looked for inexpensive methods for teaching the specific content to be covered in the in-service. The lesson plans they chose to use came from a series of curriculum projects developed by the Boston Museum of Science called: Engineering is Elementary. The specific topic they taught was titled, An Alarming Idea: Designing Alarm Circuits. Using inexpensive materials such as batteries and Christmas tree lights cut into individual sections the TEE faculty were able to teach the teachers (and students) about simple electronic circuits, the engineering design process, and several other basic principles of engineering. On the final day of the in- service, each of the groups of teachers and students were able to successfully design an alarm system as a solution to the problem given to them as part of the Engineering is Elementary curriculum. 
Because the instruction was so well received, the directors of MACILE requested that these teacher educators return on consequent years and provide additional in-service teacher training focused on technology and engineering related domains. During the summer of 2010, TEE faculty will return with university students, who are pre-service technology and engineering teachers, and teach additional topics related to electronics, robotics and rocketry. Consequently this request blends well with faculty research projects, and the mission of the TEE program: to educate learners about the principles, processes, impacts, and domains of technology and engineering.

TEE students and faculty from ______ are scheduled to return summer 2010 to the Dominican Republic to continue their work with the MACILE group. This will take the form of an official internship program where students will develop curriculum, conduct research, and receive credit for participation. In an outgrowth of this program, faculty and undergraduate students from the Construction Management Program also at ______ will work with a group of stakeholders from MACILE (i.e., school administrators, parents, students, local construction agencies) to design and build a permanent school structure for. Specifically, Construction Management interns will team with these stakeholders to design the architecture of the school, procure construction materials, and begin the process of building the school. Teaming with student interns from the TEE program, the Construction Management students will help teach students the required processes and construction codes, needed to build a school, work with Dominican teachers to develop curricular units related to engineering and technology that are appropriate for K-12 Dominican students, and work with Dominican teachers and students to implement this curriculum.

# [2] Introducing Engineering Education in K-12 Classrooms in Hitabo-Nigua, Dominican Republic

Vargas, SC. Proceeding American Society of Engineering Education, Northeast Conference Bridgeport, CT April 2009

This work considers a model to introduce engineering education in K–12 classrooms in a less advantaged region— Hitabo-Nigua (Ytabo)— in the Dominican Republic. MACILE-Ytabo started a two year pilot summer program in 2007. This work analyzes the first two years of the MACILE-Ytabo experience to evaluate whether the program has been successful at increasing participants’ interest in mathematics, sciences and engineering and to understand challenges that must be overcome to effectively introduce engineering education in K–12 classrooms in Ytabo. We evaluate learner performance, teacher participation and participants’ satisfaction with the program. Finally, we propose a model to accomplish the goal in the target region. MACILE is a novel effort. We are not aware of any other program specifically designed to advance science and engineering education in K–12 classrooms in the Dominican Republic. 

# [3] A Study Abroad in the Dominican Republic: Mentoring University Students as They Prepare and Teach Technology and Engineering Concepts to 6th-12th Grade Dominican Students

Shumway, S., SC Vargas, G Wright, R Terry. 
Proceeding American Society of Engineering Education, Vancouver, Canada June 2011 

This paper contains a report of the ongoing, collaborative effort between Complex Systems Optimization Lab (COSOLA) and the Technology and Engineering Education (TEE) Program at Brigham Young University (BYU) to design a science and technology program to improve Dominican student academic knowledge and skills. In 2007, COSOLA instituted the Matemáticas, Ciencias, Ingeniería y Lenguaje or Mathematics, Sciences, Engineering, and Language (MACILE) education program to help advance engineering and science education in less advantaged communities in the Dominican Republic (DR). The summer program was piloted in 2007 and 2008. TEE became involved in 2009. Eight of our university students spent 5 weeks during the summer of 2010 in the Dominican Republic teaching 6th -12th grade students. Under the supervision of three university faculty members, the university students developed the curriculum during spring term and then presented the material during summer term. The Dominican Republic students were assessed as to their learning and satisfaction with the instruction. The university students were assessed as to the effect that the study abroad had on their teacher development. This paper contains a report of the curriculum development, the study abroad activities, and a summary of the assessment results of both the Dominican Republic students and our university students. The full text of this article is available through the ASEE. 

# [4] A Collaborative Effort to Teach Technology an dEngineering Concepts to Middle School and High School Students in the Dominican Republic

Shumway, S., SC Vargas, G Wright, R Terry.  
Proceeding American Society of Engineering Education, Lewisville, KT June 2010

This paper will report on the joint efforts of Complex Systems Optimization Lab (COSOLA) and
Technology and Engineering Education (TEE) Program at Brigham Young University (BYU) to
provide summer program to teach technology and engineering topics to middle school and high
school students in the Dominican Republic. During the activities, we used material developed by the Engineering is Elementary program at he Boston Museum of Science. The Dominican Republic students and faculty were very engaged and enjoyed the learning experience in spite of challenging language differences. We will describe on the activities conducted, the challenges in presenting the material, and how the material was received and understood by the participating teachers and students.