The Itabo-Nigua (Ytabo) Region of the Dominican Republic (DR) lies approximately 20 miles southwest of the nation's capital, Santo Domingo.  It includes six towns and houses an estimated student population of approximately 11,800. The median monthly income is less than US$150.  On average, parents have completed through the 5th level of primary school (Survey, 2007).  Less than 50% of students completing 8th grade continue to high school and less than 60% of those entering high school graduate. 

Schools in Itabo suffer from the same problems as many Dominican schools do.  They operate under precarious conditions, lacking not only well prepared math, science, and languages teachers, but also basic needs such as safe drinking water and appropriate sanitation; appropriate school facilities and textbooks; and electricity. Working conditions of the teachers are also difficult. Most work 2-3 shifts per day at one of more schools. They generally teach 4 courses each shift, which often vary per shift and school. Class size ranges between 37 and 60 students. In addition to these conditions, learning at public schools in Ytabo is also impaired by limited parental involvement and growing socio-economic ills (i.e., high unemployment, crime, HIV/AID, drugs, alcoholism, and noise) affecting the communities (2007 survey).

Students in Itabo urgently need access to better educational environments, improved teaching, and programs that stimulate their imaginations, broaden their horizons, and provide opportunities for them to learn and succeed.
